JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour"s tonight:
Front-runners Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton
win big in yesterday's
delegate-rich primaries,
pushing the two closer to their
party's nomination
-- what this means for the rest
of the candidates
in the race.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We will always save lives, and
indeed humanity
itself. But to play that role,
we must make
America strong again.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In an
issue-focused moment
of Donald Trump's campaign, the
self-presumed
eventual nominee makes a crucial
foreign policy
speech, outlining his views on
the United
States' role in the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a writer
follows the case
of a grisly rape and murder to
find out if
it could have been avoided.
ELI SANDERS, Author, "While the
City Slept":
You can see how relatively
little potentially
it might have cost to steer him
or forcefully
nudge him in a different
direction much earlier
on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today brought a
sizable shift
in the presidential race. The
Republican front-runner
turned his attention from his
rivals to his
world view. But one of those
rivals rolled
out a running mate.
John Yang reports on this
campaign day.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It's time to shake the rust off
America's
foreign policy. It's time to
invite new voices
and new visions into the fold.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump, fresh
from a decisive
sweep of Tuesday's primaries,
delivered his
first major speech on foreign
policy.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Carly Fiorina!
JOHN YANG: Ted Cruz answered
with a headline
of his own, naming former rival
Carly Fiorina
as his running mate.
SEN. TED CRUZ: This ticket is
about the future.
It is about our children. It is
about our
grandchildren. The stakes of
this election,
we are not simply wagering on a
sporting contest.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
This is a fight worth having.
This is a fight
worth winning. And with your
help, we will
win this fight!
JOHN YANG: Cruz is banking on
next week's
Indiana primary to give him new
life. Trump
now has more than three-quarters
of the delegates
he needs for a first-ballot
victory. Last
night, he declared himself the
presumptive
nominee, and took aim at the
Democrats' likely
standard-bearer, Hillary
Clinton.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, I think the
only card
she has is the woman's card. She
has nothing
else going for her. And,
frankly, if Hillary
Clinton were a man, I don't
think she would
get 5 percent of the vote.
JOHN YANG: Clinton answered the
jibe after
winning four states, putting her
90 percent
of the way to clinching the
nomination.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, if fighting for women's
health care
and paid family leave and equal
pay is playing
the woman card, then deal me in!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: But Bernie Sanders is
not ready
to throw in his hand. The
Vermont senator
spoke today in West Lafayette,
Indiana.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
We are in this campaign to win
and to become
the Democratic nominee.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: At the same time,
Sanders told
The New York Times he plans to
lay off hundreds
of campaign workers and focus on
winning California.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will examine
the race, and
hear more of Donald Trump's
foreign policy
speech, after the news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The U.S. Supreme Court lent a
seemingly sympathetic
ear to former Virginia Governor
Bob McDonnell.
He faces two years in prison for
accepting
thousands of dollars in gifts
and loans from
a businessman. But in today's
arguments, both
liberal and conservative
justices suggested
the federal bribery law is
overbroad. A decision
could come in June.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former House
Speaker Dennis
Hastert was sentenced today to
15 months in
federal prison for paying hush
money to cover
up sexual abuse. The Illinois
Republican admitted
that he abused at least one
teenager as a
wrestling coach in high school.
He told a
federal court in Chicago: "What
I did was
wrong and I regret it."
We will hear about Hastert's day
in court
later in the program.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The fight over
federal funding
to control the Zika virus will
likely go unresolved
before next week's congressional
recess. The
White House asked for $1.9
billion back in
February. But House Speaker Paul
Ryan suggested
today that may be more than
necessary.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
The administration has a bit of
a track record
of over-requesting what they
need. So we will
sit down with the appropriators
to figure
out the best way forward, to
make sure that
we're good stewards of the
taxpayers' money
and to make sure that we have
what we need
to combat and stay ahead of the
Zika virus
issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At the White
House, Press
Secretary Josh Earnest fired
back, saying
the delay is putting the country
at risk.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
You had the director of the
National Institutes
of Health and a high-ranking
official from
the Centers for Disease Control
stand at this
podium about three weeks ago and
say they
didn't have the resources that
they needed
that should be used to fully
prepare for the
onset of the Zika virus.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Zika has been
linked to
a rare birth defect, and is
spreading rapidly
through the Americas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For a second day,
a severe
weather system menaced a large
swathe of the
nation. The threat of tornadoes
waned, but
Kansas City suffered significant
flooding
early today. And winds of 60
miles an hour
tore through the greater Houston
area, blowing
trees onto houses. So far, one
death is blamed
on the storms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the Middle
East, Israeli
security forces killed a
Palestinian woman
and her teenage brother, the
latest in a wave
of violent incidents. It
happened at a security
checkpoint between the West Bank
and Jerusalem.
Police said they fired after the
woman pulled
a knife on an officer. They said
they found
knives on the boy's body as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The only
surviving suspect
in November's terrorist attacks
in Paris was
extradited to France today.
Salah Abdeslam
is the alleged logistical
planner of the assault
that left 130 people dead. He
was taken to
a Paris court after an
early-morning transfer
from Brussels, and his lawyer
said he plans
to cooperate.
FRANK BERTON, Attorney for Salah
Abdeslam
(through translator): He gave a
spontaneous
statement to the investigating
judge, and
he insisted he would explain
himself later.
The judge put him under formal
investigation
on charges of murder, complicity
of murder
with a terrorist organization,
holding weapons
and explosives, and kidnapping.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Abdeslam was
captured in Brussels
last month.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, it's
being called the biggest gang
crackdown ever
in New York City. In pre-dawn
raids, federal
agents and police arrested
scores of suspects.
They said two rival gangs have
terrorized
housing projects in the Bronx.
In all, 120
people are being charged.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The latest
nation's report
card shows high school seniors
are losing
ground. The U.S. Department of
Education reports
that average math scores dropped
last year
for the first time since
assessments began
in 1992. Reading scores were
flat, but they
have dropped five points since
1992. As a
result, only 37 percent of all
seniors were
judged college-ready in math and
reading.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Federal
Reserve today
left short-term interest rates
unchanged for
now. In a statement,
policy-makers said there's
been solid job growth, but
economic activity
appears to be slowing. As a
result, the Fed
decided to hold off on a further
hike until
June at the earliest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street took
the Fed's
news in stride. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained 51 points to close at
18041. The Nasdaq
fell 25 points, as Apple slumped
6 percent,
and the S&P 500 added three.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
is it game over for Ted Cruz and
John Kasich?;
Donald Trump calls for a hard
line on negotiations
abroad; former House Speaker
Dennis Hastert
sentenced in a hush money
scandal; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To dig into last
night's election
results and discuss the race's
dramatic shift
going into the last leg of the
primary contest,
we are joined once again by
Susan Page of
USA Today and Reid Wilson of the
Morning Consult.
And welcome back to both of you.
Big night last night.
Reid, how did the results last
night change
the trajectory of this race? And
let's start
with the Republicans.
REID WILSON, Morning Consult: On
the Republican
side, Donald Trump swept just
about everything
he possibly could have. The only
place where
John Kasich or Ted Cruz picked
up any delegates
who will be pledged to them at
the convention
was in Rhode Island. And there
was just a
small handful of delegates.
More dramatically, I think,
there were some
reports that suggest that about
39 of the
unpledged delegates that came
out of Pennsylvania
are going to back Donald Trump
on the first
ballot. That puts him a lot
closer to a glide
path towards the nomination than
he was just
a few days ago, even after his
big wins earlier
this month.
The problem for Trump, though,
is that coming
up in May, he's still about 250
delegates
short of the number he needs.
But in the five
contests in May, there are only
199 delegates
available. So if Ted Cruz and
John Kasich
want to stick around, they sure
can, least
until June.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Susan, where
does this
leave Ted Cruz and John Kasich?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, I think that leaves them
in a predicament,
because Donald Trump is now --
he called himself
last not the presumptive
nominee. Now, maybe
we're just a step short of that,
but he is
certainly now the likely
nominee.
He is now likely to be able to
get a majority
of convention delegates on that
first ballot
or come so close, it is
impossible politically
to deny him the nomination. And
you saw him
reflect that today by giving a
big speech
on foreign policy that we had
never heard
before.
You also saw Ted Cruz trying to
get back in
the story by doing something
that seemed a
little premature, which was
announcing his
vice presidential pick.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's still April.
And what about that, Reid? I
mean, normally,
the nominee of the party waits
until either
the convention or right before
the convention.
Ted Cruz is clearly trying to
get some headlines.
REID WILSON: And it looks like
this may have
been a little bit rushed.
Remember, it was
just a few days ago when the
Cruz campaign
leaked that they were vetting
Carly Fiorina.
The vice presidential vetting
process takes
weeks and weeks to go through
tax records
and check and parse interviews
for controversial
statements.
So, this clearly is Ted Cruz
trying to change
the conversation from Donald
Trump being the
presumptive nominee to some kind
of two-person
race. I'm not sure how
successful he was.
SUSAN PAGE: You know, the one
thing it did
do, we're now talking about his
vice presidential
pick and whether it makes sense
and what will
she do, rather than talking
about the fact
that, as of last night, he
doesn't have a
mathematical way to be nominated
on the first
ballot.
He's now mathematically -- it's
now mathematically
impossible for him to go to the
convention
with a majority of delegates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: His hope, you're
saying, is
if there's a contested
convention.
But does the pick of Carly
Fiorina help him
in any way, Susan?
SUSAN PAGE: She doesn't have any
delegates.
Maybe it helps her -- if you're
trying to
look at where she might help, it
helps him
maybe with today's news cycle.
It may help
him a bit in California.
You remember in 2010 she ran for
the Senate
in California. That's that big
final primary.
But this feels, I think, just a
little desperate.
REID WILSON: I think one way in
which Carly
Fiorina will help is that she
has been one
of the more effective surrogates
to attack
Donald Trump. When she took him
on head to
head earlier in this campaign
process, you
remember Rick Perry attacked him
and then
dropped out. And Bobby Jindal
attacked him
and then dropped out.
Carly Fiorina was the only
candidate to attack
Donald Trump and then she got
boosted to the
main stage in that second
debate. So, I think
that as somebody who can draw a
contrast with
Donald Trump, that's where she
helps Cruz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She also had some
tough words
to say about Ted Cruz earlier in
the campaign,
which we were hearing again.
But just quickly, Susan, you
brought up Donald
Trump's speech today on foreign
policy. Are
we learning something different
from this,
as you say, first major speech
on the subject?
SUSAN PAGE: The speech was more
prepared than
the previous comments he's made
on foreign
policy. He actually had a
script. He read
it off a teleprompter. He does
that only rarely.
But it was pretty much
consistent with what
he has said about foreign policy
issues in
the past, and, in that way, at
odds with a
lot of traditional American
foreign policy,
especially in the Republican
Party.
So, I think it was a natural
thing for him
to do as he prepares to run in a
general election
against Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's move over
to the Democrats,
Reid. Hillary Clinton won four
of the five
states last night. Bernie
Sanders picks up
Rhode Island. Where does this
race stand?
We learned today that Bernie
Sanders is -- and
we heard that in John Yang's
report -- is
telling some of his staffers
they can't -- they
won't be staying on the payroll
any longer.
Where does he go from here?
REID WILSON: So, like the
Republican side,
Hillary Clinton is as close to
the Democratic
nomination as Donald Trump is.
Actually, she's
a little closer.
She's about 200 delegates shy.
But there are
only about 226 delegates that
are going to
be awarded in May. So, if Bernie
Sanders does
want to stick around, he can,
and essentially
wait until the very last several
days of the
race before Hillary Clinton
reaches that 2,383
delegates she needs.
But Sanders' problem is that,
while he's raised
a lot of money, he's spent a lot
of money,
too. He spent $46 million last
month. And
though he raised more than $40
million, he
is still bleeding some money. I
think that's
what the staff departures are
all about, trying
to conserve as long as possible.
As his momentum
starts to fade, the donations
are going to
start to fade, too.
SUSAN PAGE: But you already see
him pivot
from the person who think he
actually has
a chance of winning the
nomination, which
I think he no longer does, to
someone who
is figuring out, what is his
role going to
be?
He wants to push for progressive
-- a progressive
platform. He wants to affect the
party's stance
and Hillary Clinton's stance on
issues like
on regulating Wall Street or
paying for college
tuition for young people. He's
got a big role
in this party. But I think you
can see him
in his comments and the
statement he put out
last night that he understands
his role in
this fight is changing now that
Hillary Clinton
is on a clear path to be the
nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Susan, what
does Hillary
Clinton need to do at this
point?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, she needs
Bernie Sanders
to get on her side. You know,
he's gotten
70 percent of the votes of
millennials. And,
you know, those voters I don't
think would
naturally go to Trump if they
don't like Clinton.
But they might stay home.
So I think she needs Sanders to
embrace her
and to give her some of the
enthusiasm he's
been able to engender on the
left side of
the Democratic Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that something
he can do,
Reid? Can Bernie Sanders say to
these young
people and everybody else who
has been enthusiastically
showing up at his rallies, now I
want you
to turn around and vote for
Hillary Clinton?
REID WILSON: Well, it's not
something he has
done a lot in the past.
Bernie Sanders doesn't have a
long track record
of working for other Democrats
around the
rest of the country, though he
had done some
fund-raising before his
presidential campaign.
What I think Sanders is most
likely to do
is give as much of a blessing as
he possibly
can. Let's not forget that if
Clinton is the
nominee and Democrats take back
the Senate,
he gets a pretty prominent
committee chairmanship.
On the other hand, though,
Clinton is going
to try to mobilize these voters
by pointing
out her contrasts with Donald
Trump. Negative
advertising is something that
voters all say
they hate, but, boy, it sure
works. That's
why we are going to see a lot of
it this year,
especially when you're
contrasting Hillary
Clinton with someone like Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Susan, just
quickly, he
is saying he is staying in until
the convention,
even if it's to see that the
platform reflects
language he likes.
SUSAN PAGE: I think he's
guaranteed to stay
until the California primary on
June 7, as
Hillary Clinton did in 2008. But
what he -- whether
he goes to the convention in a
disruptive
role, I don't think so.
I think he is coming around to
the idea that
he wants to make sure -- he
doesn't want to
create problems in defeating
Donald Trump
in November.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Page, Reid
Wilson, thank
you both.
REID WILSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
And now we return to that Donald
Trump and
the -- or Donald Trump's speech
that he gave
this morning here in downtown
Washington.
It laid out his foreign policy
vision, or
at least part of it.
Here are some excerpts.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
My foreign policy will always
put the interests
of the American people, and
American security,
above all else. Has to be first.
Has to be.
That will be the foundation of
every decision
that I will make. After the Cold
War, our
foreign policy veered badly off
course. We
went from mistakes in Iraq to
Egypt to Libya,
to President Obama's line in the
sand in Syria.
Each of these actions have
helped to throw
the region into chaos, and gave
ISIS the space
it needs to grow and prosper.
I have a simple message for
them. Their days
are numbered. I won't tell them
where and
I won't tell them how. Our
allies are not
paying their fair share. And I
have been talking
about this recently a lot. Our
allies must
contribute toward their
financial, political
and human costs, have to do it,
of our tremendous
security burden.
And, if not, the U.S. must be
prepared to
let these countries defend
themselves. We
will discuss how we can upgrade
NATO's outdated
mission and structure grown out
of the Cold
War to confront our shared
challenges, including
migration and Islamic terrorism.
We desire to live peacefully and
in friendship
with Russia and China. We have
serious differences
with these two nations and must
regard them
with open eyes, but we are not
bound to be
adversaries. I believe an easing
of tensions
and improved relations with
Russia, from a
position of strength only, is
possible.
Fixing our relations with China
is another
important step. China respects
strength, and
by letting them take advantage
of us economically,
which they are doing like never
before, we
have lost all of their respect.
We have a
massive trade deficit with
China, a deficit
that we have to find a way
quickly to balance.
Under a Trump administration, no
American
citizen will ever again feel
that their needs
come second to the citizens of a
foreign country.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
I will view as president the
world through
the clear lens of American
interests. I will
be America's greatest defender
and most loyal
champion. We will not apologize
for becoming
successful again, but will
instead embrace
the unique heritage that makes
us who we are.
The world is most peaceful and
most prosperous
when America is strongest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For two
perspectives on Donald
Trump's foreign policy approach,
I'm joined
now by Walid Phares. He's a
scholar and terrorism
expert who advises the Trump
campaign. And
Ambassador Nicholas Burns, he's
been a top
foreign policy adviser and
diplomat for both
Republican and Democratic
presidents. He is
currently a visiting fellow at
the Hoover
Institution at Stanford
University.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Ambassador Burns, to you first.
We heard Donald Trump call the
current American
foreign policy a complete and
total disaster.
What was your overall reaction
to the speech?
NICHOLAS BURNS, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
Judy, I thought
it was a very revealing speech
about Donald
Trump.
And, frankly, as a citizen and
voter, I think
that it revealed that he doesn't
have the
qualities to be a commander in
chief and our
top diplomat. If you think about
the speech
today, it betrayed, I think, a
lack of in-depth
knowledge, a lack of
sophistication and nuance
about the very complex world
that we face,
and a lack of humility about the
restraint
that America sometimes has to
apply in the
world.
Those were the qualities, in my
mind, that
our best Republican presidents
of the last
50 years had, Dwight D.
Eisenhower, Ronald
Reagan, George H.W. Bush. You
saw very little
of that balance and restraint
today.
Instead, what Mr. Trump did
today was, he
cast a series of ultimatums and
threats mainly
against our allies, against NATO
and against
Japan and South Korea. He was
very soft on
Russia. I thought it was a very
unwise speech.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Walid Phares, a
lack of knowledge
and a lack of humility.
WALID PHARES, Donald Trump
Foreign Policy
Adviser: I wouldn't opine on his
lack of humility,
because that would be basically
the position
of his critics. That's how they
perceive him.
I would look at Mr. Trump's new
policy that
he is proposing, that it is
something new.
His critics usually try to put
him in a box.
Either they would accuse him of
being an isolationist.
And he's not, because,
precisely, he spoke
about many alliances he would
like to develop.
Or they would criticize him that
he is an
interventionist, precisely
because the fact
that he has opined on many
regions and what
to do about it. In my view, this
speech is
revealing a new school of
thought which will
develop soon and with other
speeches, which
is functionalist, meaning the
question that
he has always asked, why are we
doing this?
Why are we, for example, drawing
this policy
in Syria and failed? Why did we
take that
action in Libya and failed? Why
haven't we
found some joint principles with
Russia while
we are firm in negotiations? He
is trying
to propose something new based
on a critique,
his critique of the past eight
years, but
also most likely of the last 20
years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nicholas Burns,
why couldn't
this be seen as a new approach?
He talked
about the U.S. shouldn't
continue to be involved
in the business of
nation-building, but he
said we need a new rational
approach and we
need to seek stability in the
world.
NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, Judy, he
made a point
about three-quarters of the way
through the
speech. He says, we have to
return to diplomacy
and he wants to focus on
diplomacy.
And this is the presidential
candidate who
has maligned the entire nation
of Mexico,
1.6 billion Muslims, our NATO
allies and our
Asian allies. So, it's a curious
way to return
to diplomacy to basically be
very critical
of our allies.
But I want to go back to the
point I ended
on before. He was quite soft on
Vladimir Putin.
And, right now, the next
American president
will face Putin, who has annexed
Crimea, divided
Ukraine, and threatened our NATO
allies in
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and
Poland.
So, the next American president
needs to join
with our European allies, with
the Germans,
British, and French, in
containing Putin.
We didn't hear any of that
today. I think
it was a very naive speech in
that respect,
because he appears to want to
try to sidle
up to Putin, and yet be so tough
on our allies,
all of which whom are
democracies, that he's
going to alienate them from
American leadership.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Walid Phares,
what about that,
Nicholas Burns' point, that he
is being tough
-- or, rather, being soft on Mr.
Putin, at
the same time he's coming down
hard on America's
allies?
WALID PHARES: In comparison with
the current
administration and maybe the
last few years
of the previous administration
in terms of
being tough or being nice with
our allies,
I mean, you have a feeling in
the region,
first in the Middle East, but
also in Europe,
that there has been abandonment.
Ask the Eastern Europeans about
our policy
with regard to supporting them
and the weapon
systems that we withdrew from
the area. Ask
the Czechs, ask the Poles, but
attack also
the Egyptians. I mean, an
overwhelming majority
of Egyptians feel that the Obama
administration,
which would be continued with
the Clinton
administration, has abandoned
them, has supported
the Muslim Brotherhood.
It's only recently that we have
started to
change the policy because the
people of Egypt
have spoken. Ask the Iranians,
when they demonstrated
in 2009, how we actually
abandoned them. So,
yes, we can criticize the
beginning of a new
foreign policy because it didn't
develop yet
on the ground.
But to say that he is basically
developing
something that has been tested
before, I don't
think so. It's a new policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just staying
with you quickly,
Mr. Phares, what about
Ambassador Burns' point
that Mr. Trump was soft on
Vladimir Putin?
WALID PHARES: He is soft on
Vladimir Putin
if the policy would be
containment of Russia
no questions asked.
And, yes, he doesn't want to
contain Russia
with no questions asked. He
wants to sit down
with the Russian leadership, the
same way
Reagan engaged them, and when
there was an
issue, he confronted them. But
at the same
time, they were joint issues
against terrorism,
and we saw how it ended, how the
Soviet Union
ended, when a new policy was
developed by
Reagan and those who came after
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ambassador Burns?
NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, I think
it's naive to
think you can sit down with
Vladimir Putin
and negotiate the future of
Europe.
President Obama and President
Bush before
him dealt with Putin from a
position of strength.
We now have sanctions against
Putin because
he crossed the brightest red
line in international
police. He invaded another
country and took
over its territory. There was
nothing in the
speech about that.
There was very little in the
speech about
Chinese assertiveness in East
Asia. And I
think, Judy, the thing that
bothered me the
most about this speech, the lack
of humility.
Donald Trump castigated 35 years
of American
foreign policy. That includes
George H.W.
Bush. It includes Bill Clinton
and George
W. Bush.
We have had a number of
successes over the
last 35 years, some failures,
too. But to
say that we have an entirely --
we have been
entirely unsuccessful for three
decades is
simply untrue. And I think it
really means
to me that he's out campaigning,
and he doesn't
really have an in-depth sense of
how the world
works.
And we need to have that
confidence in a commander
in chief. Hillary Clinton has
those qualities,
but he surely doesn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Phares, was
Donald Trump
saying that American foreign
policy has been
wrong for the last 30-plus
years?
WALID PHARES: He actually said,
basically,
and gave examples in this speech
and in previous
statements that there were
mistakes made.
He didn't say everything made
since 1991 until
his event has been wrong.
But he has drawn the attention
of the public
and the voters and the citizens,
because he
was addressing the American
public at large,
to the failures, actually, and I
mentioned
a few of them, only in Syria and
Iraq, the
fact that ISIS wasn't
dismantled, the fact
that we have abandoned the Arab
alliance.
It was very clear in the media
over past few
weeks that there was a -- sort
of a rejection
in the region, at least from the
perspective
of what the Obama administration
has abandoned.
But, also, on the other hand --
and I keep
going back to that point --
Europeans are
maybe critical of what they
think Mr. Trump
is going to do. But if you ask
the Europeans
of Central Europe and Eastern
Europe, the
abandonment was done way before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
gentlemen, we are
going to have to leave it there.
Walid Phares, Ambassador
Nicholas Burns, we
thank both of you.
WALID PHARES: Thank you.
NICHOLAS BURNS: Thank you very
much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
path to murder
and how the mental health care
system failed
to stop it; how a unique therapy
helped a
man born with autism understand
emotions;
and helmets being used to
measure concussion
risks.
But, first, to the sentencing of
former House
Speaker Dennis Hastert, and the
accusations
of sexual abuse that became a
central part
of this case.
The federal judge overseeing the
proceedings,
Thomas Durkin, had tough words
for the man
who was once second in line to
the presidency.
He said -- quote -- "Nothing is
more disturbing
than having serial child
molester and speaker
of the House in the same
sentence."
We get more now on what happened
inside the
courtroom today from Natasha
Korecki, who
covers Illinois politics and
politicians for
Politico.
The trial and the sentencing
were not about
sexual abuse, but, really, this
last phase
today, it was pretty much a
trial about sexual
abuse. The victims came forward.
He actually
admitted to it?
NATASHA KORECKI, Politico:
That's right.
And when Hastert finally did go
up and speak,
he kind of glossed over that,
the abuse part
of it. He said -- quote, unquote
-- "I regret,
I'm sorry" for mistreating my
athletes when
I was a coach more than three
decades ago.
But the judge specifically held
his feet to
the fire and made him spell out
each individual,
asking him, did you sexually
abuse individual
A? And he went through the
different numbers
that have been laid out in the
past. And,
eventually, Hastert did admit to
it.
It became this very, very
pointed, dramatic
court hearing, where the victims
were just
feet away from Hastert himself,
and there
was a very direct confrontation
there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You had one of
the victims
directly, had one of the
victim's family members.
And it seemed that Dennis
Hastert was actually
asking for support, a letter of
support from
one of those victims' brothers.
It just is
appalling.
NATASHA KORECKI: You know, that
really seemed
to rub the judge the wrong way,
because I
think Hastert, going in, his
lawyers had been
making, you know, this argument
that all of
this conduct was old. It was
decades-old.
But the judge said he was so
disturbed by
that specifically, that he
called, you know,
this -- a politician well
known-here in Illinois,
Tom Cross, who used to be the
leader of the
GOP in the Illinois House.
Hastert was a mentor
to Tom Cross. He called him and
asked him
for a letter.
Instead, the Cross family
contacted federal
authorities, and Scott Cross,
Tom's brother,
came forward and gave very
pointed and very
tearful, emotional testimony
today. And he
was really -- is really the
first victim that
we have heard from publicly. We
have heard
from a deceased victim's sister
who has been,
you know, unrelenting in all of
this. And,
you know, she finally heard what
she wanted
to hear from Hastert today as
well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, the
criminal proceedings
on this case are done. But
there's still a
civil lawsuit pending?
NATASHA KORECKI: The initial
transaction that
got us here, the structuring
count, this was
involving this individual A, who
we still
don't know the identity of, or
-- it's not
been reported publicly yet.
And this individual said they
had an agreement,
that Hastert had agreed to pay
him $3.5 million.
The individual initially wanted
to get a lawyer
involved and so forth. Hastert
paid part of
the money, about almost $1
million. And this
individual says, you still owe
me the rest
of that money, and filed a
complaint in a
state court.
And that's going to be
litigated. One of the
little turns in that case now is
that individual
is trying to see if he can
remain an unnamed
victim. That part is going to --
actually,
there's a hearing tomorrow to
discuss that
aspect of it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what
happens to Dennis
Hastert now? We didn't see him
led off in
chains today.
NATASHA KORECKI: No, we didn't.
He was wheeled
out of court. His attorneys
described him
as frail and very ill.
He is going to be able to
self-surrender.
That's very typical, actually,
in federal
government for white-collar
crimes, so-called
white-collar crimes. But he's
going to report
to prison. He's going to be
designated to
a prison. It usually takes the
Bureau of Prisons
60 days or more to find a place.
He has -- the judge said he
would recommend
what they call a level four
medical facility
for him to deal with diabetes
and some other
ailments that he has described
in detail to
the judge.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Natasha Korecki
of Politico joining us from
Chicago, thanks
so much.
NATASHA KORECKI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the
harrowing account
of how a mentally ill man
attacked and raped
a young couple in Seattle and
how it exposed
gaps in our system.
Since the great recession, an
estimated $4.3
billion has been cut from mental
health services,
and only a fraction of those
funds have been
restored. Most often, this
leaves people to
suffer quietly and alone, but on
rare occasions,
that illness can lead to violent
behavior,
as Pulitzer Prize winner Eli
Sanders recounts
in a new book.
William Brangham talked with
Sanders and with
the surviving victim.
JENNIFER HOPPER, Survivor: I
think most people
who know me, they think of me as
this, like,
gregarious, outgoing person. And
with Teresa,
I was the quiet one. She'd walk
into a room,
you couldn't not notice her. She
just lit
up the room with her
personality.
ELI SANDERS, Author, "While the
City Slept":
Jennifer and Teresa were two
women who took
a long time and long roads
towards finding
themselves and then each other.
JENNIFER HOPPER: We knew we
wanted to be married.
We knew we wanted to spend our
life together.
The night before the attack, we
went to our
favorite bar. We had this
incredible conversation
about what life would look like
and what we
wanted to create for ourselves.
And she went to go get us
another drink, and
she just turned around and just
mouthed, like,
"I love you."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The very next
night, Jennifer
Hopper and Teresa Butz's plans
would come
apart in the worst way
imaginable. They went
to sleep in their home in the
South Park neighborhood
of Seattle.
They had no warning of what was
to come.
ELI SANDERS: A young man named
Isaiah Kalebu
came in through an open window
in the house
that Jennifer and Teresa shared.
He sexually assaulted each of
them under the
threat that, if they didn't do
what he wanted,
he would harm the other. He used
their love
against them. He raped both of
them. And he
began to cut both of them, and,
as they resisted,
he stabbed Teresa in the heart.
She ultimately
died. And Jennifer was able to
escape out
into the street in front of
their house.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The attack and
murder shocked
the city. An immediate manhunt
for the suspect
began. Thanks to DNA from the
crime scene
which matched DNA left at this
2008 break-in
attempt, Isaiah Kalebu was
arrested.
Eli Sanders reported the story
for Seattle's
alternative weekly The Stranger.
In 2012,
he won the Pulitzer Prize for
this feature,
"The Bravest Woman in Seattle,"
which was
about Jennifer Hopper. And now,
Sanders has
widened the story into this
book, "While the
City Slept: A Love Lost to
Violence and a
Young Man's Descent Into
Madness."
In it, Sanders tells the stories
of Jennifer
Hopper and Teresa Butz and their
life together.
Sanders spent months with Hopper
and other
family members. But he also
examines the troubled
life of their attacker.
ELI SANDERS: He was, at the time
of this crime,
a nearly 24-year-old young man
who came out
of very difficult circumstances
and had been
living for quite some time with
a serious
mental illness that wasn't
well-treated.
And he had bounced in and out of
the criminal
justice and mental health
systems in the years
before this crime, and had
actually been engaged
in a series of escalating
violent acts.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Your book
documents so many
different instances where people
spent some
time with Isaiah and clearly
recognized that
this was a young man who was in
serious trouble
and needed some help, and yet
that help was
never coming.
ELI SANDERS: Yes.
I mean, as young as elementary
school, he
had teachers showing signs of
concern. But
it wasn't clear exactly what was
going on
with him. So, as an adult, for
example, his
mother at one point, when he was
acting very
worrisome, and when she urged
him to get care,
he turned on her. He threatened
her. He told
her, she said, to enjoy her last
day on earth.
And the day after that, he was
smashing the
windows of her van with a rock
and swinging
his dog's chain at her and hit
her in the
head with the metal end of his
dog's leash.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As Kalebu's
mental state
deteriorated, he got into more
and more trouble
with the law, and cycled through
courtroom
after courtroom.
Just days before the attack, a
fight with
a police officer landed Kalebu
in district
court. But the system couldn't
see the looming
threat.
ELI SANDERS: In Washington
state, the state
that birthed Microsoft, a
district court judge's
computer cannot speak to a
superior court
judge's computer in another
county in a way
that was sufficient for the
district court
judge to see who he had in front
of him. And
so Isaiah Kalebu was released.
And not long after that, he
scared his aunt
so badly that she filed for a
restraining
order against him. And that
again failed to
set off any alarms in these
fragmented, fractured,
unintegrated systems.
The day after, she was killed in
an arson.
And he was a suspect in that
arson, but was
then released. And as his
defense attorneys
later put it, he wandered after
that, homeless
for days, accompanied only by
his dog and
his delusions, until early in
the morning
of July 19, he encountered
Teresa Butz and
Jennifer Hopper.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At Kalebu's
trial, where
he had to be restrained in a
chair because
of his regular outbursts,
Jennifer Hopper
relived that terrible night on
the witness
stand. One of the prosecutors
said she was
the strongest witness he'd seen
in 20 years.
JENNIFER HOPPER: There was never
any question
as to whether I would or could
testify. There
wouldn't be justice for my
family without
speaking the truth about what
happened, but
there would never have been
justice for her.
I mean, I got to survive, and
her family had
to bury her. I can't -- I can't
imagine what
that was like for them, so how
could I have
ever not given them that peace?
I think it
helped complete that night for a
lot of people,
including myself.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kalebu was
sentenced to
life in prison with no chance of
parole.
As Eli Sanders spent the next
years researching
Kalebu's life, how he'd slipped
through the
cracks so many times, he became
convinced
that our system for dealing with
mentally
ill people in America is
terribly broken.
ELI SANDERS: I believe that if
you just look
at this one case of Isaiah
Kalebu in Washington
state -- but Washington state
is, in the end,
a microcosm of the failures of
our nation's
mental health and criminal
justice systems
around the country -- you can
see how relatively
little, potentially, it might
have cost to
steer him or forcefully nudge
him in a different
direction much earlier on.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It seems like
we have this
conversation every time someone
with clear
mental illness goes on a violent
spree. We
always talk about how we need to
address this.
And it seems like we never do.
ELI SANDERS: Yes.
And, in a way, it is unfortunate
that we only
have this conversation in
conjunction with
violent incidents, because the
vast majority
of people who live and struggle
with mental
illness are nonviolent and more
likely to
be victims of violence than
perpetrators.
But if you want to add up the
cost to taxpayers,
which we are constantly doing in
this country,
so let's add it up. It cost more
than $3 million
for the taxpayers of Washington
state to jail
Isaiah Kalebu before his trial,
and then try
him at public expense. And now
we are going
to pay to put him in prison for
life and keep
him there. It wouldn't have cost
more than
$3 million to have tried to
intervene.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today,
Jennifer Hopper,
who is a lifelong classically
trained singer,
is using those talents to help
other victims
of sexual assault. She's part of
the Angel
Band Project, set up by Teresa
Butz's best
friends.
Their records and concerts help
other survivors
get the care they need. Jennifer
says this
work and Eli Sanders' book
telling their story
have helped honor Teresa's
memory.
JENNIFER HOPPER: Through Eli, in
the book,
she got to be very alive. To
have that relationship
and that joy that I had told in
his voice,
like, the way he told it, it's
just -- it's
so beautiful. Like, she is still
here. She
still gets to be, you know,
alive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, the book
is called "While
the City Slept: A Love Lost to
Violence and
a Young Man's Descent Into
Madness." It's
by Eli Sanders.
We will continue our Broken
Justice series
tomorrow on the "NewsHour" with
a conversation
with Deputy Attorney General
Sally Yates about
the challenges the newly
released face after
leaving prison.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the latest
"NewsHour"
Bookshelf conversation, a look
into a potential
new treatment for autism.
Transcranial magnetic
stimulation, or TMS,
can be used to diagnose damage
from brain
injuries and disorders. But a
new study investigates
whether the therapy can help
some autistic
patients make connections and
understand emotions
they have never experienced.
I recently spoke with one such
patient.
John Robison, thanks so much for
joining us.
So, first, let's start with,
what is transcranial
magnetic stimulation, and why
did you decide
to participate in this research?
JOHN ELDER ROBISON, Author,
"Switched On":
It's a therapy where they use
focused bursts
of electromagnetic energy to
transmit tiny
amounts of electricity through
the scalp and
through the skull, and into your
brain.
Your brain's an electrical
organ, so if you
want to change how it functions,
you can change
it most directly with targeted
electricity.
When I heard that there was a
study that might
help autistic people like me see
emotional
cues in other people, the idea
of it just
spoke to the heart of something
that I felt
had been a disability in me all
my life, being
unable to read body language and
expressions
and cues in other people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, you
describe this. I
want to quote a paragraph.
It says: "Imagine that, all your
life, you
have seen the world in black and
white. Meanwhile,
everyone around you describes
the beauty and
richness of color. After a
while, their talk
of color frustrates you. Which
do you believe,
their words or the evidence
before your eyes?"
So did you get a glimpse of
color?
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: Absolutely.
That's really the transformative
thing about
this. You can be an intelligent
adult, and
all your life, you hear about
color, and yet
eventually you start getting
angry because
the evidence in your eyes is
gray.
And then imagine the doctor does
something
and they turn on color for
half-an-hour. And
even if color goes away, for the
rest of your
life, you're going to know it's
real. And
that's kind of how it is for me.
They stimulated
me, and it was a temporary
thing.
The effects lasted for some
months, I would
say. Some of them faded away
quickly, some
longer. And that built an
ability that's in
me today based on that real
experience. And
it's something words and
teaching and talk
could never have achieved.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The premise of
the stimulation
wasn't that you don't have the
wiring, so
to speak, to pick up on
emotional cues. It's
just that your wiring was almost
dormant.
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: Well, you
know, the magical
thing is, the premise of the
experiment exploited
the hope that I did have the
wiring.
And when they fired the energy
into my head,
it wasn't like this gradually
came on. It
was like I went to bed and I
woke up and the
next morning, bang, it was
there. And I could,
like, look in your eyes, and it
was like seeing
into your soul. And never in my
life did I
have experience like that
before. So, it was
from nothing to everything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know, one
of the things
that you point out is that you
were overwhelmed
just by waves of emotion.
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: Just you and
me talking
like this, I would look at you,
and I would
sense a curiosity or worry or
fear or something,
and I would almost be brought to
tears by
an ordinary conversation.
And that happened to me the
first day. I would
say, excuse me. I got to just
step away and
calm down.
And it was crazy. I thought not
seeing emotion
was disabling, but seeing it in
such tremendous
intensity was, frankly, really
disabling and,
of course, thankfully, it
moderated.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what did
you see? Did
you have an expectation that
there was a world
of joy and happiness that you
weren't plugging
into?
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: I did. And I
was just
a -- I was just a crazy fool for
that, because
anyone who looks at the news
knows that the
world is not beauty and joy and
light.
Well, I thought those are the
messages I'm
missing, and if I could get
them, I would
be happy. And instead, the
messages were angst,
and jealousy and fear and worry
and...
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is what
people around
you were exhibiting?
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: It was a
pretty big shock
to me.
And the thing that was maybe the
hardest was
seeing people looking at me,
sometimes with
contempt or derision. And even
my memories,
for me to remember a time when I
was laughing
with somebody, and after the
enlightenment
of the TMS, I realized they were
laughing
at me. And that made me really,
really sad.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This also cost
you the relationship
at home with your wife.
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: It cost me
my marriage.
It cost me clients at work, who
I felt were
-- didn't like me. And, of
course, it's a
business, right? And should I
even care if
somebody likes me? But I did.
And it cost me friends. And,
like I said,
it cost me even my memories.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you go
out of your
way in the book to mention that
this is the
experiences that you had, that
even other
people that participated in the
research had
very different experiences.
You're not advocating
automatically that this is a
cure for autism
or anything like that.
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: Oh,
absolutely not.
This is -- this is not a cure
for autism.
But what it is, is, it's a story
of a powerful
transformative experience that
ultimately
had a very positive effect on
me, but it was
a rough ride. It shows, though,
the tremendous
power of this TMS technology
that's basically
unknown. Even as it's
FDA-approved to treat
depression, nobody knows it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know, this
also makes
me think, looking forward, is
there an era
that you see where people say,
well, I want
to do something to my brain to
perhaps enhance
and wake up certain parts of my
brain that
might not be as active or
efficient as they
could be?
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: I think that
that's a
very real thing that we need to
start the
conversation about now.
And that's actually one reason I
wrote "Switched
On," because I'm concerned that
people are
going to read my story, which,
frankly, is
like a stepping up of my
emotional intelligence,
and they're going to read some
of the other
accounts in newspapers, and
they're going
to think, I'm going to do this
to get my mathematical
I.Q. hopped up.
And if it's you or me, if we're
intelligent
adults, we can go into it with
our eyes open.
But what if people start saying,
I'm going
to do this to my child to speed
him up in
school? I think we have some
real serious
ethical crises coming with this
kind of technology
and how it's going to be used.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, the
book is called
"Switched On."
John Elder Robison, thanks so
much for joining
us.
JOHN ELDER ROBISON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, with
growing concern
over concussions and related
injuries, a start-up
company in Upstate New York is
using wearable
technology to help keep athletes
safer.
It is a device that sends head
injury alerts
as soon as they happen on the
field and in
the ring and also measures the
cumulative
effect of multiple hits.
From member station WXXI and
Public Media's
Innovation Trail, Sasha-Ann
Simons WXXI.
MICHAEL ROBERTSON, Student: We
start off with
a 10-minute run. After the run,
we do what's
called a set. We do jumping
jacks, pushups,
squats, like all that kind of
stuff. And we
wrap our hands.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: It's a daily
ritual for
Michael Robertson. The
16-year-old is on the
high school boxing team at
Aquinas Institute.
Six days a week, he gears up to
get in the
ring.
His head gear is high-tech.
Before every match,
he slips a small sensor inside
his headband
and then puts a helmet on. Jab
after jab,
the sensor, this one called the
LINX Impact
Assessment System, or IAS, sends
real-time
data to his coach and parents
through an app.
Not only does the sensor help
spot signs of
a concussion. It also can
uncover other, more
common types of brain injuries.
DOMINIC ARIOLI, Boxing Coach:
One of the things
that I look at with the device
is not only
how hard they're getting hit,
but if they're
getting hit, getting hit how
often with blows
that register.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Aquinas has
been field testing
the concussion sensor for about
two years.
Inside the helmet, the sensor
registers the
amount of force from a blow and
will trigger
a green, yellow, or red light,
with red being
the indicator that the hit was
too hard to
ignore. The data's available in
real time
and can be stored for review
after the match.
DOMINIC ARIOLI: We will check
with the system,
and we will also check with the
student, how
did their blow feel? And they're
a pretty
good system.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: The blow is
also given an
impact assessment score.
DAVID BORKHOLDER, BlackBox
Biometrics: That
gives a number from one to 100,
and so you
can -- the individual can gauge
the severity
of each of those impacts on that
scale. But
we also capture all the detailed
data, which
is really critical for research.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: David
Borkholder is in charge
of the technology at BlackBox
Biometrics,
which created LINX IAS. His team
is brainstorming
ways to push the technology
forward.
DAVID BORKHOLDER: Another
emerging area that
I think is actually going to be
even more
important are repetitive
subconcussive hits.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Recent
research has shown
that many brain injuries are
from subconcussive
hits, which don't display the
symptoms of
a concussion.
And according to Dr. Jeff
Bazarian of the
University of Rochester Medical
center, it's
important for wearable sensors
to be able
to pick up on those, too.
DR. JEFF BAZARIAN, University of
Rochester
Medical Center: There are
football players
that get hit all the time, day
in and day
out, never have a concussion. We
look at their
brains, it looks like they have
some mild
brain injury.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Over the
years, more companies
have introduced impact sensors
and more doctors
have diagnosed concussions.
Bazarian says that wasn't always
the case.
DR. JEFF BAZARIAN: People would
say, these
problems that you're having are
not rooted
in anything real. They're just a
psychiatric
response to being hit.
But now that we can see it,
people are saying,
oh, wow, this is kind of like a
stroke or
a ministroke. There's actually
injury here.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: There's an
adage in boxing
that the best defense is to not
get hit.
Arioli is a firm believer
technology can't
take the place of his experience
and good
training, but says he thinks
devices like
LINX IAS are useful.
DOMINIC ARIOLI: I can see if
they need to
keep their hands up, but it
gives me something
to show them, physically show
them, look how
often you're getting hit. What's
the story
here?
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm Sasha-Ann Simons in
Rochester, New York.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online:
For many, life after retirement
can be an
opportunity to travel and
explore new horizons,
but how does Medicare coverage
work while
you're on the road?
Our Medicare guru has advice on
receiving
care and prescriptions while
you're away from
home. That's in this week's Ask
Phil.
And applying for financial aid
is a daunting
task for college students, but
some universities
have found that pairing students
with their
peers can help them manage
financial hurdles.
Read more about these programs
on our home
page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And later tonight
on "Charlie
Rose": Nike chairman Phil Knight
on fortune,
philanthropy and the founding of
Nike.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Thursday, our Making Sense
series takes
a look at the business backlash
against laws
in North Carolina that many say
discriminate
against the LGBT community.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.